# General MIDI

This was potentially a big deal: while soundtracks written for the MT-32 would only work on the MT-32, soundtracks utilising General MIDI would work on any compatible keyboard or synthesizer. Hurrah!

Roland had a couple of tricks up their sleeve, however. Not only did they own the samples used in the MT-32 ROM files, but they had also developed their own separate standard – dubbed GS – which sat on top of GM and added some cool additional features such as standardised digital effects and extra instrument sounds. (As a side note, pretty much everyone else who had agreed to GM had done this too. Korg’s standard was called XS, for example.) Merging all of these together, Roland’s MT follow up, the SC-55, ended up being a bit of a beast: fully General Midi-compatible, the SC-55 managed to be backwards compatible with the MT-32’s archaic MIDI standard while also packing the extra sounds and features it needed to be fully GS compliant.

iving Roland the space they needed to include using full 16-bit PCM recordings of many of the instruments sampled. Backed up by the range of digital effects, the sounds generated by the SC-55 were effectively CD quality. Quite literally in some cases – many of the soundtracks produced for Sega and NEC’s CD add-ons would have been recorded straight from an SC-55.



Around 1991, the General MIDI standard came into being. The first Roland to support this was their new "Sound Canvas" SC-55.

With the SC-55, Roland introduced their "GS", or "General Standard", which extended the General MIDI specification by adding 98 more instruments, 15 percussion, 8 drum kits and 3 effects. The idea behind GS was that General MIDI (GM) was a bit too restrictive, and there was room to build on it whilst retaining backward compatibility with the core standard. Upon introduction in 1991, many PC game developers adopted the SC-55 as the de-facto standard for their top-end game music.


1994 - move to CD audio underway


Since the General MIDI standard only dictated which instruments were stored, and not specifically how each instrument sounded, different manufacturers recorded their own samples of these instruments - this makes them sound a little bit different from each other. Because of this, I highly recommended you listen to some samples from all of these devices to gauge which sound you prefer. Some say the Yamaha's electronic/synth sounds are stronger; others prefer the more classical Roland stringed instruments. Drums on all are equally good.

It is widely acknowledged that a lot of games developers wrote their musical pieces according to Roland's SC-series instruments (it was the de facto standard at the time), and so some concede that these are the best to buy in order to be as "authentic" as possible to what the composer intended. Having said that, it is generally accepted that games like Descent are far better played on a Yamaha MU80 than anything else!


It is an enhanced and standardised specification for MIDI (Musical Instrument Digital Interface). It assigns specific instruments to MIDI program messages so that any General MIDI device receiving program message 18 will always play a rock organ and program message 28 will always be a muted rock guitar.

Codified in 1991 by the MIDI Manufacturers Association and Japan MIDI Standards Committee, the GM standard was made redundant on release by Roland’s improved and compatible GS format.

One of GM’s major problems was the lack of quality requirements on the timbres used. So the instrument representation on a GM device could greatly vary in quality from manufacturer to manufacturer.

Many DOS games from the 1990s support General MIDI, but their music reproduction varies depending on the GM device used for playback. Most game musicians composed their tracks on Roland Sound Canvas products, making those devices a good bet for accurate playback.




Created in 1991 and pushed by Roland, the proprietary GS format is a backward compatible extension to General MIDI. GS products even reached the consumer market first and the format allowed for more varieties of instruments than GM, plus it gave Roland flexibility for future enhancements.

The Sound Canvas, with its famous SC series of cards and modules, was the branding Roland most used to push consumers to the GS format. Confusingly, there were many GS-compatible products to target various segments of the market, from home consumers to professional musicians. So the few DOS games that support playback on GS devices generally list Sound Canvas support and not the specific models.

Select Roland Sound Canvas MIDI Sound Generator GS modules.

SC-55 from 1991.
SC-155 from 1992.
SC-55 Mark II from 1993.
SC-50 from 1993.
SC-88 from 1994.


## FluidSynth

FluidSynth is a real-time, high-quality, cross-platform software MIDI synthesiser based on the SoundFont 2 specification. DOSBox Staging comes with FluidSynth 2.x built-in.


## External MIDI devices



## Configuration settings

### FluidSynth

FluidSynth settings are to be configured in the `[fluidsynth]` section.


##### fsynth_chorus

:   Configure the FluidSynth chorus.

    Possible values:

    - `auto` *default*{ .default } -- Enable chorus, except for known
      problematic SoundFonts.
    - `on` -- Always enable chorus.
    - `off` -- Disable chorus.
    - `<custom>` -- Custom setting via five space-separated values:
      voice-count (0--99), level (0.0--10.0), speed in Hz (0.1--5.0),
      depth (0.0--21.0), and modulation-wave (`sine` or `triangle`).
      For example: `3 1.2 0.3 8.0 sine`

    !!! note

        You can disable the FluidSynth chorus and enable the mixer-level
        chorus on the FluidSynth channel instead, or enable both chorus
        effects at the same time.


##### fsynth_filter

:   Filter for the FluidSynth audio output.

    Possible values:

    - `off` *default*{ .default } -- Don't filter the output.
    - `<custom>` -- Custom filter definition; see
      [Custom filter settings](../../analog-output-filters/#custom-filter-settings)
      for details.


##### fsynth_reverb

:   Configure the FluidSynth reverb.

    Possible values:

    - `auto` *default*{ .default } -- Enable reverb.
    - `on` -- Enable reverb.
    - `off` -- Disable reverb.
    - `<custom>` -- Custom setting via four space-separated values:
      room-size (0.0--1.0), damping (0.0--1.0), width (0.0--100.0),
      and level (0.0--1.0).
      For example: `0.61 0.23 0.76 0.56`

    !!! note

        You can disable the FluidSynth reverb and enable the mixer-level
        reverb on the FluidSynth channel instead, or enable both reverb
        effects at the same time.


##### soundfont

:   Name or path of SoundFont file to use (`default.sf2` by default). The
    SoundFont will be looked up in the following locations in order:

    <div class="compact" markdown>

    - The user-defined SoundFont directory (see [soundfont_dir](#soundfont_dir)).
    - The `soundfonts` directory in your DOSBox configuration directory.
    - Other common system locations.

    </div>

    The `.sf2` extension can be omitted. You can use paths relative to the
    above locations or absolute paths as well.

    !!! note

        Run `MIXER /LISTMIDI` to see the list of available SoundFonts.


##### soundfont_dir

:   Extra user-defined SoundFont directory (unset by default). If set,
    SoundFonts are looked up in this directory first, then in the standard
    system locations.


##### soundfont_volume

:   Set the SoundFont's volume as a percentage (`100` by default). This is
    useful for normalising the volume of different SoundFonts. Valid range is
    1 to 800.


### Sound Canvas

Sound Canvas settings are to be configured in the `[soundcanvas]` section.


##### soundcanvas_filter

:   Filter for the Roland Sound Canvas audio output.

    Possible values:

    - `on` *default*{ .default } -- Filter the output.
    - `off` -- Don't filter the output.
    - `<custom>` -- Custom filter definition; see
      [Custom filter settings](../../analog-output-filters/#custom-filter-settings)
      for details.


##### soundcanvas_model

:   Roland Sound Canvas model to use. One or more CLAP audio plugins that
    implement the supported Sound Canvas models must be present in the
    `plugins` directory in your DOSBox installation or configuration directory.

    Possible values:

    <div class="compact" markdown>

    - `auto` *default*{ .default } -- Pick the best available model.
    - `sc55` -- Pick the best available original SC-55 model.
    - `sc55mk2` -- Pick the best available SC-55mk2 model.
    - `<version>` -- Use the exact specified model version (e.g., `sc55_121`).

    </div>


##### soundcanvas_rom_dir

:   The directory containing the Roland Sound Canvas ROMs (unset by default).
    The directory can be absolute or relative, or leave it unset to use the
    `soundcanvas-roms` directory in your DOSBox configuration directory. Other
    common system locations will be checked as well.

