# On subjectivity

!!! note

    This is an entirely optional chapter written for people particularly
    interested in computer music. Feel free to skip it and refer to the [list
    of preferred sound devices](../overview/#selecting-the-best-audio-option)
    to configure your games for the best sound. You might want to revisit this
    chapter later as your interest in and appreciation of computer music
    grows.


While it is rare to find a person who would willingly configure a game for PC
speaker audio in the presence of better options, the "best" choice often
becomes somewhat subjective as we're moving up the [list of preferred sound
devices](../overview/#selecting-the-best-audio-option).

To save cost and effort, developers usually commissioned musicians to create
the soundtrack for the most advanced audio device their game had support for.
Music for the other "lesser" devices had usually been derived from these
original compositions, often by secondary composers, or in some cases by the
programmers themselves. The worst possible solution was to let an audio
framework (e.g., Miles Sound System) do an automatic by-the-numbers
translation from General MIDI to OPL---a wholly disappointing practice found
in some late DOS-era games. As a result of these different approaches, the
quality of these derived soundtracks vary greatly between games and
development studios.

For example, Sierra On-Line was famous for attracting high-profile musicians
to compose the Roland MT-32 "master" soundtracks for many of their post-1987
adventure games. Their first game with Roland MT-32 support was **King's Quest
IV: The Perils of Rosella** released in 1988, which was the first PC game to
feature a fully-orchestrated soundtrack written by a professional media
composer, William Goldstein.

<figure markdown>
  <audio controls src="https://archive.org/download/dosbox-staging-v0.79.0-reverb-and-chorus/alone-in-the-dark.mp3"> Your browser does not support the <code>audio</code> element.</audio>

  <figcaption markdown>
  Opening music of King's Quest IV on the Roland MT-32
  </figcaption>
</figure>

Similary, the music of **Police Quest III: The Kindred** from 1991 was
composed by Jan Hammer of Miami Vice fame specifically for the Roland MT-32.
Jan Hammer was very fond of the LA synthesis employed by the bigger brother of
the MT-32, the venerable Roland D-50 synthesiser which was a staple of 80s pop
music. Sierra simply couldn't have found a more suitable musician for the job!

<figure markdown>
  <audio controls src="https://archive.org/download/dosbox-staging-v0.79.0-reverb-and-chorus/alone-in-the-dark.mp3"> Your browser does not support the <code>audio</code> element.</audio>

  <figcaption markdown>
  Opening music of Police Quest III on the Roland MT-32
  </figcaption>
</figure>

Most people could only afford an AdLib or a Sound Blaster back in the day, but
given that now everybody has the option to listen to these soundtracks in their
original form, true to the composers' intentions, not doing so feels almost
like a sacrilige.



